it is only in the last 100 or so years
that humankind has understood that the
nucleus of the chemical elements is not
always fixed it can change spontaneously
from one element to another the name for
this process is radioactivity you
probably already know something about
the nucleus it's much tinier than the
atom it's made of particles called
protons and neutrons there are electrons
orbiting around it and though the atoms
can share or swap electrons when they
bond together the nuclei themselves
never change right well no certain
nuclei are not stable in that way this
means they may change suddenly
spontaneously the radioactive nucleus
flings out a small particle and
transforms into another element just
like that for example a carbon nucleus
can eject a fast-moving electron and
turn into a nitrogen nucleus there are
two different particles that can be
emitted from radioactive nuclei though
never together
the very fast electron is known as a
beta particle if you know a little bit
about electrons you may be thinking what
was the electron doing in the nucleus in
the first place the answer is there's a
neutron in the nucleus spontaneously
changed into a proton which stayed
behind and an electron flew out as a
beta particle this is not what chemistry
has taught us to expect the nucleus is
supposed to be stable neutrons don't
change into protons except sometimes
they do the other particle that emits
spontaneously from an unstable nucleus
is alpha an alpha particle is eight
thousand times more massive than beta
and it's a bit slower alpha is made from
two protons and two neutrons if we trap
a lot of alpha particles together we get
helium gas alpha is a helium nucleus
like the beta particle we would not have
expected a heavier nucleus to throw out
helium but again it happens and the
nucleus becomes a new element so is
radioactivity useful or just dangerous
wherever you are sitting it is quite
likely that there is a device nearby
which contains a source of alpha
articles a smoke detector the source is
radioactive americium you are totally
safe from these alpha particles which
cannot travel more than a few
centimeters in air beta particles
penetrate much further through materials
than alpha can radioactive atoms are
used in medicine as tracers to show
where chemicals travel in the patient
beta particles are emitted and have
enough energy to emerge from the body
and be detected there is a third type of
nuclear radiation gamma which is not a
particle at all
it is an electromagnetic wave like
microwaves or light but it is actually a
thousand times more energetic than
visible light
gamma rays may pass right through your
body gamma is used to zap the bacteria
in fruit to increase its shelf life or
in radiotherapy to kill cancer cells
radioactive substances get hot and this
heat can be used to generate power this
heat has been put to use in space probes
and in the past in pacemakers for hearts
the more abruptly nuclear radiation is
slowed down the more damage it does to
the atoms it hits this is called
ionization alpha causes the most
ionization as it crashes into other
atoms and gamma the least for humans the
most serious effect of radiation is the
damage that it can cause to our DNA
although alpha cannot penetrate your
skin if you inhale or ingest a
radioactive nucleus the health
consequences can be severe radioactivity
is both useful and deadly but it is all
around us as a background to the natural
world
you